Day 3: Optimizing Combinational and Sequential Circuits

Welcome to Day 3 of the workshop! Today, we focus on techniques to make digital circuits more efficient in terms of speed, area, and power consumption.

Table of Contents

Constant Propagation

State Minimization

Logic Cloning

Retiming

Hands-on Labs

1. Constant Propagation

Overview:
Constant propagation is a synthesis optimization where signals with fixed values are directly replaced with their constants. This reduces unnecessary logic and improves circuit performance.

How it works:

Analyze the design to identify signals that always carry the same value.

Replace those signals in the logic expressions with their constants.

Advantages:

Simpler Circuit: Fewer gates and simpler connections.

Faster Operation: Reduced propagation delays.

Resource Savings: Less usage of flip-flops or combinational logic.

Example:

assign y = a ? b : 0;


Here, if a is true, y takes the value of b; otherwise, y is 0.

2. State Minimization

Finite State Machines (FSMs) can often be simplified by reducing the number of states. This improves efficiency and saves power.

Steps for optimization:

State Reduction: Merge states that are functionally equivalent.

Optimal Encoding: Assign codes to states to minimize logic complexity.

Logic Simplification: Apply Boolean minimization or synthesis tools.

Power Savings: Use techniques like clock gating to reduce dynamic power.

3. Logic Cloning

Logic cloning is used to enhance timing or balance load by duplicating critical components.

How it’s done:

Identify critical paths with slow timing.

Duplicate the module or cell.

Reconnect inputs/outputs to balance signal load.

Verify improved timing and reduced delay.

4. Retiming

Retiming repositions registers in a sequential circuit to optimize the clock period without changing functionality.

Method:

Model the circuit as a graph with registers and combinational paths.

Move registers along paths to balance delays.

Maintain functional equivalence while improving performance.

5. Hands-on Labs
Lab 1: Conditional Assignment
module opt_lab1(input a, input b, output y);
    assign y = a ? b : 0;
endmodule


Function: Multiplexer-like behavior; output follows b if a is high.

Lab 2: Constant Multiplexer
module opt_lab2(input a, input b, output y);
    assign y = a ? 1 : b;
endmodule


Output is 1 when a is high; otherwise, output is b.

Lab 3: 2-to-1 Mux

Similar to Lab 2; reinforces conditional logic.

Lab 4: Nested Ternary Logic
module opt_lab4(input a, input b, input c, output y);
    assign y = a ? c : ~c;
endmodule


Three-input logic simplified to a single ternary operation.

Lab 5: D Flip-Flop with Asynchronous Reset
module dff_lab1(input clk, input reset, output reg q);
    always @(posedge clk, posedge reset) begin
        if (reset)
            q <= 1'b0;
        else
            q <= 1'b1;
    end
endmodule


Output q resets to 0; otherwise sets to 1.

Lab 6: Constant D Flip-Flop
module dff_lab2(input clk, input reset, output reg q);
    always @(posedge clk, posedge reset) begin
        q <= 1'b1;
    end
endmodule


Output always remains 1 regardless of reset or clock.
